[Fusion] Troubleshooting error codes (#1007)
seqeralabs/docs: fusion_docs/troubleshooting/error-codes-exit-messages.md

  "provider": "s3",
  "error_code": "ResourceNotFound",
  "provider_code": "NoSuchKey",
  "provider_http_status": 404,
  "provider_request_id": "ABCD1234EXAMPLE",
  "provider_error": "The specified key does not exist.",
  "message": "The requested resource was not found in cloud storage. Verify the file path is correct and the resource exists."
}
```

### Search logs

**Console logs** (grep-based searching):
```bash
# Find all cloud provider errors
grep 'provider=' .fusion.log

# Find specific error categories
grep 'error_code=' .fusion.log | grep 'Forbidden'

# Find operations on specific paths
grep 'path=/fusion/s3/bucket/file.txt' .fusion.log
```

**JSON logs** (jq-based searching):
```bash
# Find all cloud errors
jq 'select(.provider != null)' .fusion.log

# Find S3 errors only
jq 'select(.provider == "s3")' .fusion.log

# Find all Forbidden errors across providers
jq 'select(.error_code == "Forbidden")' .fusion.log

# Find errors with request IDs (for cloud support tickets)
jq 'select(.provider_request_id != null) | {provider, provider_request_id, provider_code, message}' .fusion.log
```

## Identify and resolve errors

When troubleshooting Fusion errors:

> 1. Check the[exit code](#exit-codes):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check the [exit code](#exit-codes):
```

    - Check the task exit status in Platform to understand if Fusion terminated normally (`0`), encountered an I/O error (`174`), or had a command issue (`127`).
1. Look for an `errno` code in the logs:
    - If a filesystem operation failed, use the logs to identify the `errno`  status code (e.g., `ENOENT`, `EREMOTEIO`, `EIO`) returned to the application.
1. Check for cloud error fields:
    - If you see `EREMOTEIO` or cloud-related failures, identify the specific cloud error fields in the logs:
        - `provider`
        - `provider_code`
        - `provider_http_status`
        - `provider_request_id`

    :::note
    The field `error_code` indicates Fusion's internal categorization of the cloud error normalized across providers (e.g., `ResourceNotFound`, `Forbidden`, `RateLimited`). See [Cloud provider error categories](#cloud-provider-error-categories)
    :::

1. Identify the mapped internal error (if any):

>     - The `errno` codes map back to either a cloud error category or a specific internal error (e.g., `EACCES` indicates an authentication problem, `EREMOTEIO` indicates a cloud backend issue). Check the Fusion logs for more details on the error that triggered a specific `errno` code (see [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The `errno` codes map back to either a cloud error category or a specific internal error (e.g., `EACCES` indicates an authentication problem, `EREMOTEIO` indicates a cloud backend issue). Check the Fusion logs for more details on the error that triggered a specific `errno` code (see [Fusion logs](#fusion-logs)).
```

:::tip

> Add the following to the `nextflow.config` to enable `debug` logging for the full log:

Reviewer: @alberto-miranda, please confirm this is correct. Thanks!

> Add the following to the `nextflow.config` to enable `debug` logging for the full log:

Reviewer: @alberto-miranda, please confirm this is correct. Thanks!

| `ENOSYS`    | 38    | Function not implemented  | Operation not wired in Fusion's FUSE layer |
| `ENOATTR`   | 93    | No such attribute         | Extended attribute not found |
| `ENOTSUP`   | 95    | Operation not supported   | Operation explicitly rejected (for example, hard links) |
| `ETIMEDOUT` | 110   | Connection timed out      | Context deadline exceeded |
| `EREMOTEIO` | 121   | Remote I/O error          | Cloud provider errors (QuotaExceeded, unknown cloud errors) |

### Troubleshooting FUSE status codes

When you encounter a FUSE status code, use the following table to identify likely causes and next steps:

| Status | Likely causes and troubleshooting steps |
|--------|----------------------------------------|
| `ENOENT` | Path typo or object deleted from remote store. Check if the path exists using your cloud provider's CLI (`aws s3 ls`, `gsutil ls`, `az storage blob list`). |
| `EACCES` | Mount configured as read-only, object ACL blocking writes, or authentication/permission issues. Check cloud IAM permissions and credentials. |
| `EEXIST` | Resource already exists in cloud storage. Check if the operation was retried or if there's a naming conflict. |

> | `EIO` | General I/O error or unknown internal failure. Check Fusion logs for the underlying cause. See [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `EIO` | General I/O error or unknown internal failure. Check Fusion logs for the underlying cause. See [Fusion logs](#fusion-logs). |
```

> | `EREMOTEIO` | Cloud provider error. Check Fusion logs for detailed cloud error information (provider, error code, HTTP status, request ID). May indicate quota exceeded, rate limiting, or other cloud-specific issues. See [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `EREMOTEIO` | Cloud provider error. Check Fusion logs for detailed cloud error information (provider, error code, HTTP status, request ID). May indicate quota exceeded, rate limiting, or other cloud-specific issues. See [Fusion logs](#fusion-logs). |
```

---
title: Error codes and exit messages
description: "Reference for Fusion error codes, exit codes, and error messages"
date created: "2025-01-12"
last updated: "2025-01-20"
tags: [errors, error-codes, exit-codes, fuse, logging, fusion]
---

This page describes Fusion's error reporting system, including exit codes, FUSE status codes (errno values), cloud provider error categories, and internal error types.

## Error paths

> Fusion is a FUSE filesystem that bridges applications and cloud object stores. Errors originate from multiple layers and propagate through the filesystem components in three main paths:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fusion is a FUSE filesystem that bridges applications and cloud object stores. As such, errors may originate from multiple layers, but will propagate through the filesystem components following three major paths:
```

   - Storage backends catch and normalize cloud errors (network timeouts, auth failures, rate limits) using the `clouderr` package
   - Storage backends return normalized cloud errors (with provider-agnostic categories) or internal errors (`ErrNotFound`, `ErrReadOnly`, etc.)
   - The FUSE layer maps both cloud errors and internal errors to FUSE status codes (`ENOENT`, `EACCES`, `EREMOTEIO`, `EIO`)
   - The kernel translates FUSE status to errno values for the application
   - Fusion logs cloud errors with structured details (provider, error code, HTTP status, request ID)

1. **Failures during startup/shutdown → Exit Code**

   - Startup: Configuration errors, missing credentials, or mount failures terminate Fusion immediately
   - Shutdown: Async uploads or consolidation of pending operations
   - Failures surface as exit code `174` (Fusion I/O error) or `1` (fatal error)

1. **Background Operations → Logs**

   - Async uploads during normal operation, cache eviction, and snapshot operations log errors but may not surface them to applications
   - Errors are reported in Fusion (see [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs))

> ## Triaging errors

Reviewer 3: Identifying and resolving?

When troubleshooting Fusion errors:

1. Check the exit code:

>     - Check the process exit code (`$?`) to understand if Fusion terminated normally (`0`), encountered an I/O error (`174`), or had a command issue (`127`).

Reviewer 2: It could be nice to cross-reference the `Exit codes` section in case we add more exit codes in the future and we forget to update this sentence.

1. Look at FUSE status in the logs:
    - If a filesystem operation failed, use the logs to identify the FUSE status code (e.g., `ENOENT`, `EREMOTEIO`, `EIO`) returned to the application.
1. Check for cloud error fields:
    - If you see `EREMOTEIO` or cloud-related failures, identify the specific cloud error fields in the logs:
        - `provider`
        - `provider_code`
        - `provider_http_status`
        - `provider_request_id`

    :::note
    The field `error_code` indicates Fusion's internal categorization of the cloud error normalized across providers (e.g., `ResourceNotFound`, `Forbidden`, `RateLimited`).
    :::

> 1. Identify the mapped internal error:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Identify the mapped internal error (if any):
```

>     - The FUSE status code maps back to either a cloud error category or a specific internal error (e.g., `EACCES` indicates an authentication problem, `EREMOTEIO` indicates a cloud backend issue). Check the Fusion logs for more details on the error that triggered the FUSE status code (see [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The `errno` codes map back to either a cloud error category or a specific internal error (e.g., `EACCES` indicates an authentication problem, `EREMOTEIO` indicates a cloud backend issue). Check the Fusion logs for more details on the error that triggered a specific `errno` code (see [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs)).
```

| Scenario | Log cue | Suggested next step |
|----------|----------------|---------------------|
| Failed to start FUSE process in background | `on FUSE process` | Check FUSE/kernel support. Verify `/dev/fuse` exists. |
| Failed to send SIGTERM to FUSE process | `on FUSE sigterm send` | Check kernel logs (`dmesg`) for crashed processes. |
| Failed to wait for FUSE process termination | `on FUSE stop wait` | Check for zombie processes. Review kernel signal handling. |
| Error during filesystem shutdown | `on file system shutdown` | Check Fusion logs for pending upload errors. See [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs). |
| Error during filesystem unmount | `on file system unmount` | Run `fusermount -u /fusion` or `umount -l /fusion` manually. |
| Failed read/write path validation | `check-rw` or `check-ro` | Verify cloud credentials and bucket permissions. |

### GPU tracer binary

| Exit code | Meaning | When |
|-----------|---------|------|
| `0` | Success | Normal completion (GPU detected or not) |
| `1` | Error | Failed to start GPU monitoring |
| `2` | Invalid input | Missing PID, invalid PID format, or PID `<= 0` |

> ## FUSE status codes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## `errno` status codes
```

Fusion maps internal errors to standard FUSE status codes returned to the operating system. These are the [errno](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/errno.3.html) values applications receive when filesystem operations fail.

:::note
For a complete list of errno values and their meanings, see the [Linux errno man page](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/errno.3.html) or run `errno -l` on a Linux system.
:::

### Returned status codes

> Fusion's filesystem implementation actively returns these status codes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fusion's filesystem operations actively returns these status codes:
```

| `EACCES` | Mount configured as read-only, object ACL blocking writes, or authentication/permission issues. Check cloud IAM permissions and credentials. |
| `EEXIST` | Resource already exists in cloud storage. Check if the operation was retried or if there's a naming conflict. |
| `EIO` | General I/O error or unknown internal failure. Check Fusion logs for the underlying cause. See [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs). |
| `EREMOTEIO` | Cloud provider error. Check Fusion logs for detailed cloud error information (provider, error code, HTTP status, request ID). May indicate quota exceeded, rate limiting, or other cloud-specific issues. See [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs). |
| `EBUSY` | Cloud provider rate limiting requests or temporarily busy. Retry with backoff. Check cloud provider dashboard for service status. |
| `ETIMEDOUT` | Operation timed out due to network connectivity issues or slow cloud response. Check network connection and cloud service status. |
| `EINTR` | Caller cancelled the operation. Usually safe to retry. |
| `ENOTSUP` | Unsupported operation. Adjust workload to avoid hard links. Use symlinks or copies instead. |

> | `ENOSYS` | Operation not implemented in Fusion. Check if the operation is supported or use an alternative approach. |

Reviewer: Agree. We can address this in another PR.

- **`EREMOTEIO` (Remote I/O error)**: Used specifically for cloud provider errors. This errno value indicates that:
  - The error originated from a remote cloud storage system (S3, Azure Blob Storage, or Google Cloud Storage).
  - The failure is due to cloud provider issues (quota exceeded, rate limiting, service unavailable).
  - Debugging should focus on cloud provider logs and status, not local system issues.
  - The request ID from logs can be provided to cloud support for investigation.

- **`EIO` (I/O error)**: Used as a generic catch-all for:
  - Unknown internal errors that are not cloud-related.
  - Local filesystem or system failures.
  - Errors that cannot be classified into more specific categories.

:::note
Using `EREMOTEIO` for cloud errors provides more accurate error context, making it easier to distinguish between local system issues and cloud service problems during troubleshooting and monitoring.
:::

:::tip
When you see `EREMOTEIO`, check the Fusion logs for cloud error fields: `provider`, `error_code`, `provider_code`, `provider_http_status`, and `provider_request_id`. See [Understanding Fusion logs](#understanding-fusion-logs).
:::

### Error mapping

> Fusion maps cloud provider errors and internal errors to FUSE status codes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fusion maps cloud provider errors and internal errors to errno codes.
```

| `InvalidArgument` | Malformed request or invalid parameters | S3: "InvalidArgument", "InvalidRange", Azure: "InvalidQueryParameterValue", GCS: HTTP 400 |
| `QuotaExceeded` | Storage quota or capacity limit reached | S3: "TooManyBuckets", Azure: "AccountLimitExceeded", GCS: HTTP 429 with quota message |
| `Unknown` | Unclassified or unexpected error | Various |

## Fatal error messages

These messages indicate Fusion terminated immediately with exit code 1. They occur during startup or critical failures:

| Message | Cause |
|---------|-------|
| `configuring fusion` | Failed to configure Fusion (invalid config, missing environment variables) |
| `building remote store options` | Failed to build remote store options |
| `creating metadata store` | Failed to create metadata store |
| `creating data store` | Failed to create data store connection |
| `validating work path` | Work path validation failed (empty prefix or connection error) |
| `creating filesystem` | Failed to create FUSE filesystem |
| `mounting filesystem` | Failed to mount FUSE filesystem |
| `could not get current job attempt` | Failed to get job attempt from compute environment |

> ## Understanding Fusion logs

Reviewer: I've moved this, but other structural changes will be done in a separate PR.

# Find specific error categories
grep 'error_code=' .fusion.log | grep 'Forbidden'

# Find operations on specific paths
grep 'path=/fusion/s3/bucket/file.txt' .fusion.log
```

**JSON logs** (jq-based searching):
```bash
# Find all cloud errors
jq 'select(.provider != null)' .fusion.log

# Find S3 errors only
jq 'select(.provider == "s3")' .fusion.log

# Find all Forbidden errors across providers
jq 'select(.error_code == "Forbidden")' .fusion.log

# Find errors with request IDs (for cloud support tickets)
jq 'select(.provider_request_id != null) | {provider, provider_request_id, provider_code, message}' .fusion.log
```

## Nextflow integration

When running Nextflow with Fusion:

- Exit code `0`: Task completed successfully
- Exit code `127`: Retry logic activates (`.command.sh` not found)
- Exit code `174`: Fusion I/O error—check logs for details

### Check exit codes

```bash
fusion --foreground
exit_code=$?

case $exit_code in
    0)
        echo "Success"
        ;;
    127)
        echo "Command not found - may retry"
        ;;
    174)
        echo "Fusion I/O error - check Fusion logs"
        ;;
    *)
        echo "Unknown exit code: $exit_code"
        ;;
esac

> ```

Reviewer 2: I don't think this section is needed.

These architectural roles impose constraints on how Fusion can communicate operation errors as well as its own failures:

- **Limitations in POSIX error codes**: As a filesystem, Fusion communicates I/O operation failures only through standard POSIX error codes (`ENOENT`, `EACCES`, `EIO`, etc.). The filesystem interface provides no mechanism to return rich error context—it cannot explain why an operation failed beyond a generic error code. As a result, Fusion cannot provide detailed error information to the user process through the filesystem interface and returns only a generic I/O error (`EIO`).

- **User process controls output**: When Fusion returns a POSIX error code, the process (not Fusion) determines what to display to the user. Fusion cannot control this output.

- **Ambiguity of exit codes**: As the container entrypoint, the container's final exit code can originate from either Fusion itself (e.g., exit code `174`) or from the task's actual command. When a container exits with a failure code, there's no immediate way to determine the source of the failure without examining logs.

> - **Mixed log outputs**: Fusion also emits errors to stdout, where they typically mix with the task output. They are indistinguishable from a task's own errors when you review the task's logs.

Reviewer 2: Yes, we will not be able to fix the ambiguity until Fusion stops being the task's entrypoint (i.e. we start using Ignite).

## Error paths

Fusion is a FUSE filesystem that bridges applications and cloud object stores. Errors originate from multiple layers and propagate through the filesystem components in three main paths:

1. **Cloud → Storage Backend → FUSE Layer → Kernel → Application**

>    - Storage backends catch and normalize cloud errors (network timeouts, auth failures, rate limits) using the `clouderr` package

Reviewer: Do you want to replace it with something? Removing it would result in a sentence like: "Storage backends catch and normalize cloud errors (network timeouts, auth failures, rate limits)." Can we indicate how/where/why another way?

>    - Storage backends catch and normalize cloud errors (network timeouts, auth failures, rate limits) using the `clouderr` package

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - Storage backends catch and normalize cloud errors using the `clouderr` package (e.g., network timeouts, authentication failures, rate limits)
```
